# README

This README would normally document whatever steps are necessary to get the
application up and running.

Things you may want to cover:

* Ruby version

* System dependencies

* Configuration

* Database creation

* Database initialization

* How to run the test suite

* Services (job queues, cache servers, search engines, etc.)

* Deployment instructions

* ...


Step 1: Create the folder for the new Rails application
First, open a terminal and type the commands below that will create and navigate inside the new folder for your project:

mkdir my-app
cd my-app
If you are using Windows, you might have to use different commands to achieve the same result.

Step 2: Create the Docker files
Once inside the new folder, we create the file Dockerfile with a minimal setup to create an image that supports Ruby:

FROM ruby:3.1.0

WORKDIR /usr/src/app
Before building the new Docker image, let’s create a file named docker-compose.yml with the following content:

services:
web:
build: .
ports:
- "3000:3000"
volumes:
- .:/usr/src/app
The file above sets up a container called web that exposes the port 3000 (the port used by Rails) and sets up a volume that mounts the current path of the host machine to the folder /usr/src/app in the container.

The volume is essential so that when we generate the Rails application in the container, the template files will persist in the host filesystem.

Step 3: Generate a Rails application
Now we can go ahead and access the terminal of the container while exposing the service ports so we can access the Rails application later on via localhost:3000:

docker-compose run --service-ports web bash
Once inside the container, we can install Rails and generate a new application:

gem install rails
rails new .
After running these commands, you should see all the files generated by Rails in the project folder.

Step 4: Start the application
Next, we can start our Rails application using the option -b to bind the webserver to the correct IP address.

rails s -b 0.0.0.0
If everything goes well, we should be able to access localhost:3000 and see the default homepage of our new Rails application:

Rails application default homepage

Step 5: Install project dependencies when building the Docker image
We generated the new Rails application, and we can start it from inside the container, but if you exit the container and reaccess it, you will see that we can no longer start the server.

Press ctrl+c to stop the server
Type exit to exit the container
Type docker-compose run --service-ports web bash to start a new terminal session
Type rails s -b 0.0.0.0 to start the Rails application
The terminal will show an error message that it can’t find the command rails. This error happens because we installed Rails in the previous terminal session, and it doesn’t persist between sessions.

To fix that, we can change the file Dockerfile to install all the project dependencies, including Rails as part of the build process:

FROM ruby:3.1.0

WORKDIR /usr/src/app

COPY . .
RUN bundle install
The last two lines copy all the files from the current folder of the host machine to the Docker image, including the Gemfile, and run the command to install all the project dependencies.

From the host machine, we can now run docker-compose build to build the new image that will contain all dependencies installed.

After that, we can then access a new terminal session in the Docker container and start the Rails application:

docker-compose run --service-ports web bash
rails s -b 0.0.0.0
To confirm that everything is working, you can access localhost:3000 and verify that the default Rails homepage shows up.

Step 6: Set up a default command for the main container
Before we go, let’s define a command for our main container, so we can start the Rails application by running docker-compose up:

services:
web:
build: .
ports:
- "3000:3000"
volumes:
- .:/usr/src/app
command: rails s -b 0.0.0.0
If you now run docker-compose up from the host machine, the Rails application will start, and you should be able to access it at localhost:3000.

With that, you are ready to commit and share the bootstrap of your Rails application with your coworkers.